# Layer 2: They Must Be Heard

Layer 2 addresses how the SLHP came into formation within the FWP and proposed a different method and form of sociological knowledge predicated on first person narratives that centered qualitative rather than quantitative ways of knowing. The layer begins with the political and institutional conditions that facilitated the founding of the Southern Life Histories Project. Because of his reputation as director of UNC Press, in 1936 Couch was asked to serve as the associate director of the N.C. Writers Project for the Federal Writers’ Project. By cutting his teeth on the American Guide Series, Couch learned how to work within the federal agency and proved himself invaluable. With the support of the  FWP’s Director Henry Alberg, he organized the life histories project upon being named the FWP’s Regional Director of the Southeastern region in 1938. With one foot in the federal government, which lent him the authority to pursue his new approach to documenting social conditions, and one foot in academia, as the director of the South’s most prominent press, Couch built the Southern Life History Project (SLHP).

The layer turns to the aims of the SLHP. The method of “life histories” was an intentional intervention in debates about what counted as sociological knowledge during the era. Debates over how to capture and document social life—whether that be through numbers and statistics in sociology, ethnographies from anthropologies, first-hand stories through folklorists, or through the increasingly broad category of “documentary”—abounded.  Acknowledging and explicitly in conversation with these debates, Couch conceptualized of “life histories” as a more authentic form of documentation that allowed readers to more accurately and realistically access the lived experiences of communities.  

By then tracking how this method became known as “life histories” we reveal the aims of the project. The initial focus was centered in sociology. Deeply concerned about the effects of the Great Depression on the working class, Couch identified factory workers, mill workers, and tenant farmers as the initial subjects of the life histories. The ability to hear from Southerners in their words, Couch argued, lent authority and authenticity to their claims about their conditions.  Inspired by FWP projects focused on documenting the past such as the collection of folkways,  the life histories were also imagined as recording history; a possibility forged by interviewer’s interest in recording the memories of a generation who had experienced incredible social change during and following the Civil War.  By recording these memories through the form of life histories, the project created a new method of collecting evidence about social conditions in the past and present by giving the people who were the subject of the sociological gaze of academics and the New Deal state  a voice in the process rather than privileging anthropological and sociological experts’ statistics.

The layer finally turns to how Couch set-up the SLHP within the institutional structure of the FWP. Because writers were hired at the state level, he sent unemployed white collar workers throughout their state to interview fellow Southerners about their lives and thereby shape Southern identities through their own words. As part of the Works Progress Administration, the life histories were collected by writers with varying levels of expertise, including creative writers, journalists, educators, and some who just marked ‘writing experience’ on their WPA applications. Writers were sent out to different locations with an outline to follow when conducting interviews. However, they were given permission to diverge from the outline when necessary, because “the stories will not be usable if they are constructed on a rigid pattern” as Couch argued (Couch, 417). According to his instructions, their goal was “accuracy, human interest, social importance, and literary excellence,” which was to be achieved by telling the story “in the words of the persons who are consulted” (Couch, 417-8) .At stake was not only method but power relations between intellectuals, academic disciplines, and the New Deal state, but the actual people who were the subject of documentary work to which the following layers will turn.
